
# MSDS 460 Assignment 4

MSDS Assignment 4: Monte Carlo Methods



## Authors

- Charles Lamb, Connor Cassedy, Heidi Huckabay, Susan Alrifai

## Abstract

Abstract
In data science, there are often multiple ways to solve problems; despite this, there may be particular solutions that work better from an efficiency and performance standpoint. From consumer data collected by a company offering a free trial to its users, this assignment explores the benefits of using a Gaussian Naïve Bayes versus a Logistic Regression Model to explore how to determine whether an individual reaches a  “conversion threshold” defined by a specific utility function that interacts with relevant parameters. This threshold is binary such that a free trial consumer will either re-engage with the service or neglect it after 90 days. After this, a benchmark exhibit presents performance results when each model is scaled up in increments of 10k, 20k, and 50k records. Instead of creating predictive models in different languages, the modeling tools remain consistent in Python where accuracy, precision, recall, and F-1 attributes are compared. The end-result is a clear depiction where a Logistic Regression Model outperforms the Gaussian Naïve Bayes in most ways by approximately 15%. Beyond this result, the paper explores important factors that the data scientist must consider when completing this specific task. Among these are time and resource constrictions, management procedures, and the necessity of benchmark methods to guide the process.


## Methodology 

The hypothetical question our project considers is as follows: Our Company, Vis-soft, produces data visualization software that competes with PowerBi and Tableau. With less brand recognition than many of our competitors, Vis-soft offers a 90 day free-trial of its platform. The Company's CEO would like to predict which trial customers will convert to a paid subscription and which will not. This will help the Company both with near term financial modeling but also can be used to offer incentives to customers not expected to adopt a paid subscription at the end of the trial period (https://github.com/hheid-huc/MSDS460_Group_Assignments/blob/main/Assignment4/Data_Simulation%20(1).ipynb).  
The core of this project relies on delivering an efficient choice of tools within the framework of a performance benchmark study. With all things considered, both the benchmark and the alternate method have a remarkably similar preparation itinerary. Both start off by simulating users and core customer attribute variables. Additionally, other attributes including AI modules, prior experience, publications are simulated with their respective distributions. A standardized utility captures the values of these attributes, and then the program trains itself on the data to spit out a determination of whether or not the customer will pay for the service. 
Bringing the data in and out of the systems took little time. For the Bayes Model it took .8921 seconds or 892 milliseconds, and for the Logistic Regression Model it took 0.9731 seconds or 973 milliseconds. To get the data out of the systems, the Bayes Model took 50.2 milliseconds and the Logistic Regression Model took 9.7 milliseconds. The implementation of the benchmarks is dependent on the level of expertise the individual who is implementing the benchmark has. In regards to this project, it took approximately 3 hours for the total comparison of both the Gaussian Naïve Bayes and Logistic Regression Models. Bringing the data into the systems consisted of and simulating consumer behavior on a variety of participant levels.
Free trials are ubiquitous across many subscription-based industries including streaming, news, and software hosting. Although a similar analysis can take place with giants like Netflix and the New York Times, the specific attributes that the project considers are similar in spirit to data visualization software resources like PowerBi and Tableau. In our case, the quantity of publications (the shared reports and dashboards shared to other users on the platform) and use of modules (AI powered resources distinct to the platform) are attributes considered when determining conversion. However, competing companies like PowerBi and Tableau have a 14.70% and 14.46% respective market share in the Business Intelligence (BI) category, and it is almost certain that these organizations deploy similar tactics to retain free-trial users and convert them to paid.
The reason for this is the incredible flexibility Python and its libraries offer to develop predictions from proprietary data. Within their extensive ecosystems, these companies can gather user data on a massive scale that transverses across many different components. Because of their larger scale, the selection of a predictive model will be critical to not exhaust computational resources.  Once the data scientist data frames and utility functions for certain attributes, there is a certain ease that arises in determining optimal performance. The built-in GaussianNB and LogisticRegression functions in Python allow modeling models to be implemented without any rigorous understanding of statistics and probability theory. Instead, the demand of the data scientist is to clean data properly and develop manipulable frames that work well with Python libraries.
Oddly enough, the sphere where our company operates is providing data visualization software, which may appear to overlap with the Gaussian Naïve Bayes and Logistic Regression Models we used to identify conversion. But there is a difference. Vis-soft (like PowerBi and Tableau) works to give business workers easy ways to produce reports and documents to present information surrounding a relevant situation. In most cases beyond a free-trial, these services cost money. But the tools revolving around performance benchmarks do not have a predetermined price. Vis-soft employees will have to monitor customers to categorize their behavior and eventually transform these attributes to dataframes. Next, they can use this to compare approaches and choose one that maximizes accuracy, performance, recall, and F-1; comparing these predictive performance metrics can all be done in an .ipynb environment without the need of costworthy hosting. In a broader scenario with terabytes of data with hundreds of different attributes, this approach may not work, and these types of companies may need to explore alternate solutions to expand computing power.

## Results
The research conducted explored the benefits of using a Gaussian Naïve Bayes versus a Logistic Regression Model in regards to reaching a threshold of determining if consumers will choose to re-engage with a service or abandon it following a 90 day free trial. The results obtained depict that there was a significant advantage of using a Logistic Regression Model to determine how many users would be predicted to switch over to paid users of the provided application by an average of 15%. Across the parameters of Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F-1, the Logistic Regression Model outperformed Gaussian Naïve Bayes in each category. Looking at each category specifically, There is a slight decrease in the accuracy going in the Logistic Regression which starts at 0.804 at the 10k training size before decreasing to 0.803 at 20k and then staying consistently at .803 through 50k. However in the Bayes model accuracy increases from the 10k to 20k training size going from 0.706 to 0.709 before decreasing down to 0.705 at 50k. 
With precision we see the Logistic regression decrease by .001 when the training size increases to 20k before remaining there and in the Bayes model we see again another increase from the 10k to 20k from 0.590 to 0.593 before then decreasing back down to 0.589 at 50k. For recall, the Bayes model decreases as data size increases going from 0.947 to 0.944 before increasing back up to 0.947 whereas the logistic regression model does the opposite by starting at 0.986 and then increasing to 0.988 before regressing back to 0.986. Finally, the F-1 category does not change much across the Logistic regression by staying at 0.87 while the bayes model fluctuates by 0.001 by going from 0.727 to 0.728 and then 0.726. Although there is not much of a fluctuation between points, the Bayes model overall benchmark scores were significantly lower by at least 10% in every category besides recall. 
In regards to our study, we did not utilize a Monte Carlo simulation across different database systems, but rather to compare different modeling tools in a singular language, python.While Logistic Regression looks at the probability of a binary outcome, the Gaussian Naïve Bayes is a probabilistic classification algorithm with strong independence assumptions. In the case of what we are attempting to measure via utilization of a binary threshold concerning consumer behavior, it is no surprise that the Logistic Regression model outperformed the Bayes. 
Shifting focus  to understanding the extent in which a model focused on predicting probability is beneficial, our group feels confident the benchmarks chosen were necessary in order to exhibit an accurate simulation of expected results. When attempting to approach a predictive model problem, it is important to take note of previous literature and research on the task at hand to ensure appropriate methods are being employed. At the same time, only constructing this model in a singular language could be considered a limitation as employing other visualization softwares could provide more insight on discrepancies that are being overlooked by using one language.

## Conclustion
In conclusion, if the study were to be conducted again, it would be recommended to either incorporate more than two models to predict consumer behavior such as a neural network or Linear Discriminant Analysis or even other languages like SQL, or R. It could also be beneficial to add more parameters to the benchmark.

## Bibliography 
Miller, Thomas. “Homework Assignment 4: Monte Carlo Methods  “Performance Benchmark” 2023. https://canvas.northwestern.edu/courses/200718/assignments/1276271?module_item_id=2761743

“Microsoft Power Bi vs Tableau Software: Business Intelligence (BI) Comparison.” 6sense.   Accessed November 12, 2023. https://6sense.com/tech/business-intelligence-bi/microsoftpowerbi-vs-tableausoftware#.

Lamb, Charles. “Data_Simulation” 2023. https://github.com/hheid-huc/MSDS460_Group_Assignments/blob/main/Assignment4/Data_Simulation%20(1).ipynb
